BEFORE THE STORY.

FIRST SCENE.

BOULOGNE-SUR-MER.--THE DUEL.

I.

THE doctors could do no more for the Dowager Lady Berrick.

When the medical advisers of a lady who has reached seventy years
of age recommend the mild climate of the South of France, they
mean in plain language that they have arrived at the end of their
resources. Her ladyship gave the mild climate a fair trial, and
then decided (as she herself expressed it) to "die at home."
Traveling slowly, she had reached Paris at the date when I last
heard of her. It was then the beginning of November. A week
later, I met with her nephew, Lewis Romayne, at the club.

"What brings you to London at this time of year?" I asked.

"The fatality that pursues me," he answered grimly. "I am one of
the unluckiest men living."

He was thirty years old; he was not married; he was the enviable
possessor of the fine old country seat, called Vange Abbey; he
had no poor relations; and he was one of the handsomest men in
England. When I add that I am, myself, a retired army officer,
with a wretched income, a disagreeable wife, four ugly children,
and a burden of fifty years on my back, no one will be surprised
to hear that I answered Romayne, with bitter sincerity, in these
words:

"I wish to heaven I could change places with you!"

"I wish to heaven you could!" he burst out, with equal sincerity
on his side. "Read that."

He handed me a letter addressed to him by the traveling medical
attendant of Lady Berrick. After resting in Paris, the patient
had continued her homeward journey as far as Boulogne. In her
suffering condition, she was liable to sudden fits of caprice. An
insurmountable horror of the Channel passage had got possession
of her; she positively refused to be taken on board the
steamboat. In this difficulty, the lady who held the post of her
"companion" had ventured on a suggestion. Would Lady Berrick
consent to make the Channel passage if her nephew came to
Boulogne expressly to accompany her on the voyage? The reply had
been so immediately favorable, that the doctor lost no time in
communicating with Mr. Lewis Romayne. This was the substance of
the letter.

It was needless to ask any more questions--Romayne was plainly on
his way to Boulogne. I gave him some useful information. "Try the
oysters," I said, "at the restaurant on the pier."

He never even thanked me. He was thinking entirely of himself.

"Just look at my position," he said. "I detest Boulogne; I
cordially share my aunt's horror of the Channel passage; I had
looked forward to some months of happy retirement in the country
among my books--and what happens to me? I am brought to London in
this season of fogs, to travel by the tidal train at seven
to-morrow morning--and all for a woman with whom I have no
sympathies in common. If I am not an unlucky man--who is?"

He spoke in a tone of vehement irritation which seemed to me,
under the circumstances, to be simply absurd. But _my_ nervous
system is not the irritable system--sorely tried by night study
and strong tea--of my friend Romayne. "It's only a matter of two
days," I remarked, by way of reconciling him to his situation.

"How do I know that?" he retorted. "In two days the weather may
be stormy. In two days she may be too ill to be moved.
Unfortunately, I am her heir; and I am told I must submit to any
whim that seizes her. I'm rich enough already; I don't want her
money. Besides, I dislike all traveling--and especially traveling
alone. You are an idle man. If you were a good friend, you would
offer to go with me." He added, with the delicacy which was one
of the redeeming points in his wayward character. "Of course as
my guest."

I had known him long enough not to take offense at his reminding
me, in this considerate way, that I was a poor man. The proposed
change of scene tempted me. What did I care for the Channel
passage? Besides, there was the irresistible attraction of
getting away from home. The end of it was that I accepted
Romayne's invitation.

II.

SHORTLY after noon, on the next day, we were established at
Boulogne--near Lady Berrick, but not at her hotel. "If we live in
the same house," Romayne reminded me, "we shall be bored by the
companion and the doctor. Meetings on the stairs, you know, and
exchanging bows and small talk." He hated those trivial
conventionalities of society, in which, other people delight.
When somebody once asked him in what company he felt most at
ease? he made a shocking answer--he said, "In the company of
dogs."

I waited for him on the pier while he went to see her ladyship.
He joined me again with his bitterest smile. "What did I tell
you? She is not well enough to see me to-day. The doctor looks
grave, and the companion puts her handkerchief to her eyes. We
may be kept in this place for weeks to come."

The afternoon proved to be rainy. Our early dinner was a bad one.
This last circumstance tried his temper sorely. He was no
gourmand; the question of cookery was (with him) purely a matter
of digestion. Those late hours of study, and that abuse of tea to
which I have already alluded, had sadly injured his stomach. The
doctors warned him of serious consequences to his nervous system,
unless he altered his habits. He had little faith in medical
science, and he greatly overrated the restorative capacity of his
constitution. So far as I know, he had always neglected the
doctors' advice.

The weather cleared toward evening, and we went out for a walk.
We passed a church--a Roman Catholic church, of course--the doors
of which were still open. Some poor women were kneeling at their
prayers in the dim light. "Wait a minute," said Romayne. "I am in
a vile temper. Let me try to put myself into a better frame of
mind."