Book 2 Chapter 16

About three miles before it reaches the town, the river Mowe
undulates through a plain.  The scene, though not very
picturesque, has a glad and sparkling character.  A stone
bridge unites the opposite banks by three arches of good
proportion; the land about consists of meads of a vivid
colour, or vegetable gardens to supply the neighbouring
population, and whose various hues give life and lightness to
the level ground.  The immediate boundaries of the plain on
either side are chiefly woods; above the crest of which in one
direction expands the brown bosom of a moor.  The few cottages
which are sprinkled about this scene being built of stone, and
on an ample scale, contribute to the idea of comfort and
plenty which, with a serene sky and on a soft summer day, the
traveller willingly associates with it.

Such was the sky and season in which Egremont emerged on this
scene a few days after the incidents recorded in our last
chapter.  He had been fishing in the park of Mowbray, and had
followed the rivulet through many windings until, quitting the
enclosed domain it had forced its way through some craggy
underwood at the bottom of the hilly moors we have noticed,
and finally entering the plain, lost itself in the waters of
the greater stream.

Good sport had not awaited Egremont.  Truth to say, his rod
had played in a very careless hand.  He had taken it, though
an adept in the craft when in the mood, rather as an excuse to
be alone, than a means to be amused.  There are seasons in
life when solitude is a necessity; and such a one had now
descended on the spirit of the brother of Lord Marney.

The form of Sybil Gerard was stamped upon his brain.  It
blended with all thoughts; it haunted every object.  Who was
this girl, unlike all women whom he had yet encountered, who
spoke with such sweet seriousness of things of such vast
import, but which had never crossed his mind, and with a kind
of mournful majesty bewailed the degradation of her race?  The
daughter of the lowly, yet proud of her birth.  Not a noble
lady in the land who could boast a mien more complete, and
none of them thus gifted, who possessed withal the fascinating
simplicity that pervaded every gesture and accent of the
daughter of Gerard.

Yes! the daughter of Gerard; the daughter of a workman at a
manufactory.  It had not been difficult, after the departure
of Sybil, to extract this information from the garrulous wife
of the weaver.  And that father,--he was not unknown to
Egremont.  His proud form and generous countenance were still
fresh in the mind's eye of our friend.  Not less so his
thoughtful speech; full of knowledge and meditation and
earnest feeling!  How much that he had spoken still echoed in
the heart, and rung in the brooding ear of Egremont.  And his
friend, too, that pale man with those glittering eyes, who
without affectation, without pedantry, with artlessness on the
contrary and a degree of earnest singleness, had glanced like
a master of philosophy at the loftiest principles of political
science,--was he too a workman?  And are these then THE
PEOPLE?  If so, thought Egremont, would that I lived more
among them!  Compared with their converse, the tattle of our
saloons has in it something humiliating.  It is not merely
that it is deficient in warmth, and depth, and breadth; that
it is always discussing persons instead of principles, and
cloaking its want of thought in mimetic dogmas and its want of
feeling in superficial raillery; it is not merely that it has
neither imagination, nor fancy, nor sentiment, nor feeling,
nor knowledge to recommend it; but it appears to me, even as
regards manner and expression, inferior in refinement and
phraseology; in short, trivial, uninteresting, stupid, really
vulgar.

It seemed to Egremont that, from the day he met these persons
in the Abbey ruins, the horizon of his experience had
insensibly expanded; more than that, there were streaks of
light breaking in the distance, which already gave a new
aspect to much that was known, and which perhaps was
ultimately destined to reveal much that was now utterly
obscure.  He could not resist the conviction that from the
time in question, his sympathies had become more lively and
more extended; that a masculine impulse had been given to his
mind; that he was inclined to view public questions in a tone
very different to that in which he had surveyed them a few
weeks back, when on the hustings of his borough.

Revolving these things, he emerged, as we have stated, into
the plain of the Mowe, and guiding his path by the course of
the river, he arrived at the bridge which a fancy tempted him
to cross.  In its centre, was a man gazing on the waters below
and leaning over the parapet.  His footstep roused the
loiterer, who looked round; and Egremont saw that it was
Walter Gerard.

Gerard returned his salute, and said, "Early hours on Saturday
afternoon make us all saunterers;" and then, as their way was
the same, they walked on together.  It seemed that Gerard's
cottage was near at hand, and having inquired after Egremont's
sport, and receiving for a reply a present of a brace of
trout,--the only one, by the bye, that was in Egremont's
basket,--he could scarcely do less than invite his companion
to rest himself.
"There is my home," said Gerard, pointing to a cottage
recently built, and in a pleasing style.  Its materials were
of a fawn-coloured stone, common in the Mowbray quarries.  A
scarlet creeper clustered round one side of its ample porch;
its windows were large, mullioned, and neatly latticed; it
stood in the midst of a garden of no mean dimensions but every
bed and nook of which teemed with cultivation; flowers and
vegetables both abounded, while an orchard rich with promise
of many fruits; ripe pears and famous pippins of the north and
plums of every shape and hue; screened the dwelling from that
wind against which the woods that formed its back-ground were
no protection.

"And you are well lodged!  Your garden does you honour."

"I'll be honest enough to own I have no claim to the credit,"
said Gerard.  "I am but a lazy chiel."

They entered the cottage, where a hale old woman greeted them.