The author arrives after some difficulties at Goa.  Is chosen for
the Mission of Aethiopia.  The fate of those Jesuits who went by
Zeila.  The author arrives at the coast of Melinda.


I embarked in March, 1622, in the same fleet with the Count
Vidigueira, on whom the king had conferred the viceroyship of the
Indies, then vacant by the resignation of Alfonso Noronha, whose
unsuccessful voyage in the foregoing year had been the occasion of
the loss of Ormus, which being by the miscarriage of that fleet
deprived of the succours necessary for its defence, was taken by the
Persians and English.  The beginning of this voyage was very
prosperous:  we were neither annoyed with the diseases of the
climate nor distressed with bad weather, till we doubled the Cape of
Good Hope, which was about the end of May.  Here began our
misfortunes; these coasts are remarkable for the many shipwrecks the
Portuguese have suffered.  The sea is for the most part rough, and
the winds tempestuous; we had here our rigging somewhat damaged by a
storm of lightning, which when we had repaired, we sailed forward to
Mosambique, where we were to stay some time.  When we came near that
coast, and began to rejoice at the prospect of ease and refreshment,
we were on the sudden alarmed with the sight of a squadron of ships,
of what nation we could not at first distinguish, but soon
discovered that they were three English and three Dutch, and were
preparing to attack us.  I shall not trouble the reader with the
particulars of this fight, in which, though the English commander
ran himself aground, we lost three of our ships, and with great
difficulty escaped with the rest into the port of Mosambique.

This place was able to afford us little consolation in our uneasy
circumstances; the arrival of our company almost caused a scarcity
of provisions.  The heat in the day is intolerable, and the dews in
the night so unwholesome that it is almost certain death to go out
with one's head uncovered.  Nothing can be a stronger proof of the
malignant quality of the air than that the rust will immediately
corrode both the iron and brass if they are not carefully covered
with straw.  We stayed, however, in this place from the latter end
of July to the beginning of September, when having provided
ourselves with other vessels, we set out for Cochim, and landed
there after a very hazardous and difficult passage, made so partly
by the currents and storms which separated us from each other, and
partly by continual apprehensions of the English and Dutch, who were
cruising for us in the Indian seas.  Here the viceroy and his
company were received with so much ceremony, as was rather
troublesome than pleasing to us who were fatigued with the labours
of the passage; and having stayed here some time, that the gentlemen
who attended the viceroy to Goa might fit out their vessels, we set
sail, and after having been detained some time at sea, by calms and
contrary winds, and somewhat harassed by the English and Dutch, who
were now increased to eleven ships of war, arrived at Goa, on
Saturday, the 16th of December, and the viceroy made his entry with
great magnificence.

I lived here about a year, and completed my studies in divinity; in
which time some letters were received from the fathers in Aethiopia,
with an account that Sultan Segued, Emperor of Abyssinia, was
converted to the Church of Rome, that many of his subjects had
followed his example, and that there was a great want of
missionaries to improve these prosperous beginnings.  Everybody was
very desirous of seconding the zeal of our fathers, and of sending
them the assistance they requested; to which we were the more
encouraged, because the emperor's letters informed our provincial
that we might easily enter his dominions by the way of Dancala, but
unhappily, the secretary wrote Zeila for Dancala, which cost two of
our fathers their lives.

We were, however, notwithstanding the assurances given us by the
emperor, sufficiently apprised of the danger which we were exposed
to in this expedition, whether we went by sea or land.  By sea, we
foresaw the hazard we run of falling into the hands of the Turks,
amongst whom we should lose, if not our lives, at least our liberty,
and be for ever prevented from reaching the court of Aethiopia.
Upon this consideration our superiors divided the eight Jesuits
chosen for this mission into two companies.  Four they sent by sea
and four by land; I was of the latter number.  The four first were
the more fortunate, who though they were detained some time by the
Turkish bassa, were dismissed at the request of the emperor, who
sent him a zebra, or wild ass, a creature of large size and
admirable beauty.

As for us, who were to go by Zeila, we had still greater
difficulties to struggle with:  we were entirely strangers to the
ways we were to take, to the manners, and even to the names of the
nations through which we were to pass.  Our chief desire was to
discover some new road by which we might avoid having anything to do
with the Turks.  Among great numbers whom we consulted on this
occasion, we were informed by some that we might go through Melinda.
These men painted that hideous wilderness in charming colours, told
us that we should find a country watered with navigable rivers, and
inhabited by a people that would either inform us of the way, or
accompany us in it.  These reports charmed us, because they
flattered our desires; but our superiors finding nothing in all this
talk that could be depended on, were in suspense what directions to
give us, till my companion and I upon this reflection, that since
all the ways were equally new to us, we had nothing to do but to
resign ourselves to the Providence of God, asked and obtained the
permission of our superiors to attempt the road through Melinda.  So
of we who went by land, two took the way of Zeila, and my companion
and I that of Melinda.
