CHAPTER  I - A BEGGAR ON HORSEBACK


THE 25th day of August, 1751, about two in the afternoon, I, David 
Balfour, came forth of the British Linen Company, a porter attending me 
with a bag of money, and some of the chief of these merchants bowing me 
from their doors.  Two days before, and even so late as yestermorning, 
I was like a beggar-man by the wayside, clad in rags, brought down to 
my last shillings, my companion a condemned traitor, a price set on my 
own head for a crime with the news of which the country rang.  To-day I 
was served heir to my position in life, a landed laird, a bank porter 
by me carrying my gold, recommendations in my pocket, and (in the words 
of the saying) the ball directly at my foot.

There were two circumstances that served me as ballast to so much sail.  
The first was the very difficult and deadly business I had still to 
handle; the second, the place that I was in.  The tall, black city, and 
the numbers and movement and noise of so many folk, made a new world 
for me, after the moorland braes, the sea-sands and the still country-
sides that I had frequented up to then.  The throng of the citizens in 
particular abashed me.  Rankeillor's son was short and small in the 
girth; his clothes scarce held on me; and it was plain I was ill 
qualified to strut in the front of a bank-porter.  It was plain, if I 
did so, I should but set folk laughing, and (what was worse in my case) 
set them asking questions.  So that I behooved to come by some clothes 
of my own, and in the meanwhile to walk by the porter's side, and put 
my hand on his arm as though we were a pair of friends.

At a merchant's in the Luckenbooths I had myself fitted out:  none too 
fine, for I had no idea to appear like a beggar on horseback; but 
comely and responsible, so that servants should respect me.  Thence to 
an armourer's, where I got a plain sword, to suit with my degree in 
life.  I felt safer with the weapon, though (for one so ignorant of 
defence) it might be called an added danger.  The porter, who was 
naturally a man of some experience, judged my accoutrement to be well 
chosen.

"Naething kenspeckle," said he; "plain, dacent claes.  As for the 
rapier, nae doubt it sits wi' your degree; but an I had been you, I 
would has waired my siller better-gates than that."  And he proposed I 
should buy winter-hosen from a wife in the Cowgate-back, that was a 
cousin of his own, and made them "extraordinar endurable."

But I had other matters on my hand more pressing.  Here I was in this 
old, black city, which was for all the world like a rabbit-warren, not 
only by the number of its indwellers, but the complication of its 
passages and holes.  It was, indeed, a place where no stranger had a 
chance to find a friend, let be another stranger.  Suppose him even to 
hit on the right close, people dwelt so thronged in these tall houses, 
he might very well seek a day before he chanced on the right door.  The 
ordinary course was to hire a lad they called a CADDIE, who was like a 
guide or pilot, led you where you had occasion, and (your errands being 
done) brought you again where you were lodging.  But these caddies, 
being always employed in the same sort of services, and having it for 
obligation to be well informed of every house and person in the city, 
had grown to form a brotherhood of spies; and I knew from tales of Mr. 
Campbell's how they communicated one with another, what a rage of 
curiosity they conceived as to their employer's business, and how they 
were like eyes and fingers to the police.  It would be a piece of 
little wisdom, the way I was now placed, to take such a ferret to my 
tails.  I had three visits to make, all immediately needful:  to my 
kinsman Mr. Balfour of Pilrig, to Stewart the Writer that was Appin's 
agent, and to William Grant Esquire of Prestongrange, Lord Advocate of 
Scotland.  Mr. Balfour's was a non-committal visit; and besides (Pilrig 
being in the country) I made bold to find the way to it myself, with 
the help of my two legs and a Scots tongue.  But the rest were in a 
different case.  Not only was the visit to Appin's agent, in the midst 
of the cry about the Appin murder, dangerous in itself, but it was 
highly inconsistent with the other.  I was like to have a bad enough 
time of it with my Lord Advocate Grant, the best of ways; but to go to 
him hot-foot from Appin's agent, was little likely to mend my own 
affairs, and might prove the mere ruin of friend Alan's.  The whole 
thing, besides, gave me a look of running with the hare and hunting 
with the hounds that was little to my fancy.  I determined, therefore, 
to be done at once with Mr. Stewart and the whole Jacobitical side of 
my business, and to profit for that purpose by the guidance of the 
porter at my side.  But it chanced I had scarce given him the address, 
when there came a sprinkle of rain - nothing to hurt, only for my new 
clothes - and we took shelter under a pend at the head of a close or 
alley.

Being strange to what I saw, I stepped a little farther in.  The narrow 
paved way descended swiftly.  Prodigious tall houses sprang upon each 
side and bulged out, one storey beyond another, as they rose.  At the 
top only a ribbon of sky showed in.  By what I could spy in the 
windows, and by the respectable persons that passed out and in, I saw 
the houses to be very well occupied; and the whole appearance of the 
place interested me like a tale.


~ (SeaFogs – Stevenson)
A change in the colour of the light usually called me in the morning. By
a certain hour, the long, vertical chinks in our western gable, where
the boards had shrunk and separated, flashed suddenly into my eyes as
stripes of dazzling blue, at once so dark and splendid that I used to
marvel how the qualities could be combined. At an earlier hour, the
heavens in that quarter were still quietly coloured, but the shoulder of
the mountain which shuts in the canyon already glowed with sunlight in a
wonderful compound of gold and rose and green; and this too would
kindle, although more mildly and with rainbow tints, the fissures of our
crazy gable. If I were sleeping heavily, it was the bold blue that
struck me awake; if more lightly, then I would come to myself in that
earlier and fairier light.

One Sunday morning, about five, the first brightness called me. I rose
and turned to the east, not for my devotions, but for air. The night had
been very still. The little private gale that blew every evening in our
canyon, for ten minutes or perhaps a quarter of an hour, had swiftly
blown itself out; in the hours that followed, not a sigh of wind had
shaken the treetops; and our barrack, for all its breaches, was less
fresh that morning than of wont. But I had no sooner reached the window
than I forgot all else in the sight that met my eyes, and I made but two
bounds into my clothes, and down the crazy plank to the platform.

The sun was still concealed below the opposite hilltops, though it was
shining already, not twenty feet above my head, on our own mountain
slope. But the scene, beyond a few near features, was entirely changed.
Napa Valley was gone; gone were all the lower slopes and woody foothills
of the range; and in their place, not a thousand feet below me, rolled a
great level ocean. It was as though I had gone to bed the night before,
safe in a nook of inland mountains and had awakened in a bay upon the
coast. I had seen these inundations from below; at Calistoga I had risen
and gone abroad in the early morning, coughing and sneezing, under
fathoms on fathoms of gray sea vapour, like a cloudy sky - a dull sight
for the artist, and a painful experience for the invalid. But to sit
aloft one's self in the pure air and under the unclouded dome of heaven,
and thus look down on the submergence of the valley, was strangely
different and even delightful to the eyes. Far away were hilltops like
little islands. Nearer, a smoky surf beat about the foot of precipices
and poured into all the coves of these rough mountains. The colour of
that fog ocean was a thing never to be forgotten. For an instant, among
the Hebrides and just about sundown, I have seen something like it on
the sea itself. But the white was not so opaline; nor was there, what
surprisingly increased the effect, that breathless crystal stillness
over all. Even in its gentlest moods the salt sea travails, moaning
among the weeds or lisping on the sand; but that vast fog ocean lay in a
trance of silence, nor did the sweet air of the morning tremble with a
sound.

As I continued to sit upon the dump, I began to observe that this sea
was not so level as at first sight it appeared to be. Away in the
extreme south, a little hill of fog arose against the sky above the
general surface, and as it had already caught the sun it shone on the
horizon like the topsails of some giant ship. There were huge waves,
stationary, as it seemed, like waves in a frozen sea; and yet, as I
looked again, I was not sure but they were moving after all, with a slow
and august advance. And while I was yet doubting, a promontory of the
hills some four or five miles away, conspicuous by a bouquet of tall
pines, was in a single instant overtaken and swallowed up. It reappeared
in a little, with its pines, but this time as an islet and only to be
swallowed up once more and then for good. This set me looking nearer,
and I saw that in every cove along the line of mountains the fog was
being piled in higher and higher, as though by some wind that was
inaudible to me. I could trace its progress, one pine tree first growing
hazy and then disappearing after another; although sometimes there was
none of this forerunning haze, but the whole opaque white ocean gave a
start and swallowed a piece of mountain at a gulp. It was to flee these
poisonous fogs that I had left the seaboard, and climbed so high among
the mountains. And now, behold, here came the fog to besiege me in my
chosen altitudes, and yet came so beautifully that my first thought was
of welcome.Letter 1


TO Mrs. Saville, England

St. Petersburgh, Dec. 11th, 17-

You will rejoice to hear that no disaster has accompanied the
commencement of an enterprise which you have regarded with such evil
forebodings.  I arrived here yesterday, and my first task is to assure
my dear sister of my welfare and increasing confidence in the success
of my undertaking.

I am already far north of London, and as I walk in the streets of
Petersburgh, I feel a cold northern breeze play upon my cheeks, which
braces my nerves and fills me with delight.  Do you understand this
feeling?  This breeze, which has travelled from the regions towards
which I am advancing, gives me a foretaste of those icy climes.
Inspirited by this wind of promise, my daydreams become more fervent
and vivid.  I try in vain to be persuaded that the pole is the seat of
frost and desolation; it ever presents itself to my imagination as the
region of beauty and delight.  There, Margaret, the sun is forever
visible, its broad disk just skirting the horizon and diffusing a
perpetual splendour.  There--for with your leave, my sister, I will put
some trust in preceding navigators--there snow and frost are banished;
and, sailing over a calm sea, we may be wafted to a land surpassing in
wonders and in beauty every region hitherto discovered on the habitable
globe.  Its productions and features may be without example, as the
phenomena of the heavenly bodies undoubtedly are in those undiscovered
solitudes.  What may not be expected in a country of eternal light?  I
may there discover the wondrous power which attracts the needle and may
regulate a thousand celestial observations that require only this
voyage to render their seeming eccentricities consistent forever.  I
shall satiate my ardent curiosity with the sight of a part of the world
never before visited, and may tread a land never before imprinted by
the foot of man. These are my enticements, and they are sufficient to
conquer all fear of danger or death and to induce me to commence this
laborious voyage with the joy a child feels when he embarks in a little
boat, with his holiday mates, on an expedition of discovery up his
native river. But supposing all these conjectures to be false, you
cannot contest the inestimable benefit which I shall confer on all
mankind, to the last generation, by discovering a passage near the pole
to those countries, to reach which at present so many months are
requisite; or by ascertaining the secret of the magnet, which, if at
all possible, can only be effected by an undertaking such as mine.

These reflections have dispelled the agitation with which I began my
letter, and I feel my heart glow with an enthusiasm which elevates me
to heaven, for nothing contributes so much to tranquillize the mind as
a steady purpose--a point on which the soul may fix its intellectual
eye.  This expedition has been the favourite dream of my early years. I
have read with ardour the accounts of the various voyages which have
been made in the prospect of arriving at the North Pacific Ocean
through the seas which surround the pole.  You may remember that a
history of all the voyages made for purposes of discovery composed the
whole of our good Uncle Thomas' library.  My education was neglected,
yet I was passionately fond of reading.  These volumes were my study
day and night, and my familiarity with them increased that regret which
I had felt, as a child, on learning that my father's dying injunction
had forbidden my uncle to allow me to embark in a seafaring life.

These visions faded when I perused, for the first time, those poets
whose effusions entranced my soul and lifted it to heaven.  I also
became a poet and for one year lived in a paradise of my own creation;
I imagined that I also might obtain a niche in the temple where the
names of Homer and Shakespeare are consecrated.  You are well
acquainted with my failure and how heavily I bore the disappointment. 
But just at that time I inherited the fortune of my cousin, and my
thoughts were turned into the channel of their earlier bent.

Six years have passed since I resolved on my present undertaking.  I
can, even now, remember the hour from which I dedicated myself to this
great enterprise.  I commenced by inuring my body to hardship.  I
accompanied the whale-fishers on several expeditions to the North Sea;
I voluntarily endured cold, famine, thirst, and want of sleep; I often
worked harder than the common sailors during the day and devoted my
nights to the study of mathematics, the theory of medicine, and those
branches of physical science from which a naval adventurer might derive
the greatest practical advantage.  Twice I actually hired myself as an
under-mate in a Greenland whaler, and acquitted myself to admiration. I
must own I felt a little proud when my captain offered me the second
dignity in the vessel and entreated me to remain with the greatest
earnestness, so valuable did he consider my services.  And now, dear
Margaret, do I not deserve to accomplish some great purpose?  My life
might have been passed in ease and luxury, but I preferred glory to
every enticement that wealth placed in my path.  Oh, that some
encouraging voice would answer in the affirmative!  My courage and my
resolution is firm; but my hopes fluctuate, and my spirits are often
depressed.  I am about to proceed on a long and difficult voyage, the
emergencies of which will demand all my fortitude:  I am required not
only to raise the spirits of others, but sometimes to sustain my own,
when theirs are failing.
his is the most favourable period for travelling in Russia.  They fly
quickly over the snow in their sledges; the motion is pleasant, and, in
my opinion, far more agreeable than that of an English stagecoach. 

The sun had now gotten much higher, and through all the gaps of the
hills it cast long bars of gold across that white ocean. An eagle, or
some other very great bird of the mountain, came wheeling over the
nearer pinetops, and hung, poised and something sideways, as if to look
abroad on that unwonted desolation, spying, perhaps with terror, for the
eyries of her comrades. Then, with a long cry, she disappeared again
toward Lake County and the clearer air. At length it seemed to me as if
the flood were beginning to subside. The old landmarks, by whose
disappearance I had measured its advance, here a crag, there a brave
pine tree, now began, in the inverse order, to make their reappearance
into daylight. I judged all danger of the fog was over. This was not
Noah's flood; it was but a morning spring, and would now drift out
seaward whence it came. So, mightily relieved, and a good deal
exhilarated by the sight, I went into the house to light the fire.
