NOONDAY IN CHEPE.


'Twas noonday in Chepe.  High Tide in the mighty River City!--its
banks wellnigh overflowing with the myriad-waved Stream of Man!
The toppling wains, bearing the produce of a thousand marts; the
gilded equipage of the Millionary; the humbler, but yet larger
vehicle from the green metropolitan suburbs (the Hanging Gardens of
our Babylon), in which every traveller might, for a modest
remuneration, take a republican seat; the mercenary caroche, with
its private freight; the brisk curricle of the letter-carrier,
robed in royal scarlet: these and a thousand others were laboring
and pressing onward, and locked and bound and hustling together in
the narrow channel of Chepe.  The imprecations of the charioteers
were terrible.  From the noble's broidered hammer-cloth, or the
driving-seat of the common coach, each driver assailed the other
with floods of ribald satire.  The pavid matron within the one
vehicle (speeding to the Bank for her semestrial pittance) shrieked
and trembled; the angry Dives hastening to his office (to add
another thousand to his heap,) thrust his head over the blazoned
panels, and displayed an eloquence of objurgation which his very
Menials could not equal; the dauntless street urchins, as they
gayly threaded the Labyrinth of Life, enjoyed the perplexities and
quarrels of the scene, and exacerbated the already furious
combatants by their poignant infantile satire.  And the
Philosopher, as he regarded the hot strife and struggle of these
Candidates in the race for Gold, thought with a sigh of the
Truthful and the Beautiful, and walked on, melancholy and serene.

'Twas noon in Chepe.  The ware-rooms were thronged.  The flaunting
windows of the mercers attracted many a purchaser: the glittering
panes behind which Birmingham had glazed its simulated silver,
induced rustics to pause: although only noon, the savory odors of
the Cook Shops tempted the over hungry citizen to the bun of Bath,
or to the fragrant potage that mocks the turtle's flavor--the
turtle!  O dapibus suprimi grata testudo Jovis!  I am an Alderman
when I think of thee!  Well: it was noon in Chepe.

But were all battling for gain there?  Among the many brilliant
shops whose casements shone upon Chepe, there stood one a century
back (about which period our tale opens) devoted to the sale of
Colonial produce.  A rudely carved image of a negro, with a
fantastic plume and apron of variegated feathers, decorated the
lintel.  The East and West had sent their contributions to
replenish the window.

The poor slave had toiled, died perhaps, to produce yon pyramid of
swarthy sugar marked "ONLY 6 1/2d."--That catty box, on which was
the epigraph "STRONG FAMILY CONGO ONLY 3s. 9d," was from the
country of Confutzee--that heap of dark produce bore the legend
"TRY OUR REAL NUT"--'Twas Cocoa--and that nut the Cocoa-nut, whose
milk has refreshed the traveller and perplexed the natural
philosopher.  The shop in question was, in a word, a Grocer's.

In the midst of the shop and its gorgeous contents sat one who, to
judge from his appearance (though 'twas a difficult task, as, in
sooth, his back was turned), had just reached that happy period of
life when the Boy is expanding into the Man.  O Youth, Youth!
Happy and Beautiful!  O fresh and roseate dawn of life; when the
dew yet lies on the flowers, ere they have been scorched and
withered by Passion's fiery Sun!  Immersed in thought or study, and
indifferent to the din around him, sat the boy.  A careless
guardian was he of the treasures confided to him.  The crowd passed
in Chepe; he never marked it.  The sun shone on Chepe; he only
asked that it should illumine the page he read.  The knave might
filch his treasures; he was heedless of the knave.  The customer
might enter; but his book was all in all to him.

And indeed a customer WAS there; a little hand was tapping on the
counter with a pretty impatience; a pair of arch eyes were gazing
at the boy, admiring, perhaps, his manly proportions through the
homely and tightened garments he wore.

"Ahem! sir!  I say, young man!" the customer exclaimed.

"Ton d'apameibomenos prosephe," read on the student, his voice
choked with emotion.  "What language!" he said; "how rich, how
noble, how sonorous! prosephe podas--"

The customer burst out into a fit of laughter so shrill and cheery,
that the young Student could not but turn round, and blushing, for
the first time remarked her.  "A pretty grocer's boy you are," she
cried, "with your applepiebomenos and your French and lingo.  Am I
to be kept waiting for hever?"

"Pardon, fair Maiden," said he, with high-bred courtesy: "'twas not
French I read, 'twas the Godlike language of the blind old bard.
In what can I be serviceable to ye, lady?" and to spring from his
desk, to smooth his apron, to stand before her the obedient Shop
Boy, the Poet no more, was the work of a moment.

"I might have prigged this box of figs," the damsel said good-
naturedly, "and you'd never have turned round."

"They came from the country of Hector," the boy said.  "Would you
have currants, lady?  These once bloomed in the island gardens of
the blue Aegean.  They are uncommon fine ones, and the figure is
low; they're fourpence-halfpenny a pound.  Would ye mayhap make
trial of our teas?  We do not advertise, as some folks do: but sell
as low as any other house."

"You're precious young to have all these good things," the girl
exclaimed, not unwilling, seemingly, to prolong the conversation.
"If I was you, and stood behind the counter, I should be eating
figs the whole day long."

"Time was," answered the lad, "and not long since I thought so too.
I thought I never should be tired of figs.  But my old uncle bade
me take my fill, and now in sooth I am aweary of them."

"I think you gentlemen are always so," the coquette said.