CHAPTER I

GIVES AN ACCOUNT OF OUR VILLAGE AND THE FIRST GLIMPSE OF THE
DIAMOND

When I came up to town for my second year, my aunt Hoggarty made me
a present of a diamond-pin; that is to say, it was not a diamond-
pin then, but a large old-fashioned locket, of Dublin manufacture
in the year 1795, which the late Mr. Hoggarty used to sport at the
Lord Lieutenant's balls and elsewhere.  He wore it, he said, at the
battle of Vinegar Hill, when his club pigtail saved his head from
being taken off,--but that is neither here nor there.

In the middle of the brooch was Hoggarty in the scarlet uniform of
the corps of Fencibles to which he belonged; around it were
thirteen locks of hair, belonging to a baker's dozen of sisters
that the old gentleman had; and, as all these little ringlets
partook of the family hue of brilliant auburn, Hoggarty's portrait
seemed to the fanciful view like a great fat red round of beef
surrounded by thirteen carrots.  These were dished up on a plate of
blue enamel, and it was from the GREAT HOGGARTY DIAMOND (as we
called it in the family) that the collection of hairs in question
seemed as it were to spring.

My aunt, I need not say, is rich; and I thought I might be her heir
as well as another.  During my month's holiday, she was
particularly pleased with me; made me drink tea with her often
(though there was a certain person in the village with whom on
those golden summer evenings I should have liked to have taken a
stroll in the hayfields); promised every time I drank her bohea to
do something handsome for me when I went back to town,--nay, three
or four times had me to dinner at three, and to whist or cribbage
afterwards.  I did not care for the cards; for though we always
played seven hours on a stretch, and I always lost, my losings were
never more than nineteenpence a night:  but there was some infernal
sour black-currant wine, that the old lady always produced at
dinner, and with the tray at ten o'clock, and which I dared not
refuse; though upon my word and honour it made me very unwell.

Well, I thought after all this obsequiousness on my part, and my
aunt's repeated promises, that the old lady would at least make me
a present of a score of guineas (of which she had a power in the
drawer); and so convinced was I that some such present was intended
for me, that a young lady by the name of Miss Mary Smith, with whom
I had conversed on the subject, actually netted me a little green
silk purse, which she gave me (behind Hicks's hayrick, as you turn
to the right up Churchyard Lane)--which she gave me, I say, wrapped
up in a bit of silver paper.  There was something in the purse,
too, if the truth must be known.  First there was a thick curl of
the glossiest blackest hair you ever saw in your life, and next
there was threepence:  that is to say, the half of a silver
sixpence hanging by a little necklace of blue riband.  Ah, but I
knew where the other half of the sixpence was, and envied that
happy bit of silver!

The last day of my holiday I was obliged, of course, to devote to
Mrs. Hoggarty.  My aunt was excessively gracious; and by way of a
treat brought out a couple of bottles of the black currant, of
which she made me drink the greater part.  At night when all the
ladies assembled at her party had gone off with their pattens and
their maids, Mrs. Hoggarty, who had made a signal to me to stay,
first blew out three of the wax candles in the drawing-room, and
taking the fourth in her hand, went and unlocked her escritoire.

I can tell you my heart beat, though I pretended to look quite
unconcerned.

"Sam my dear," said she, as she was fumbling with her keys, "take
another glass of Rosolio" (that was the name by which she baptised
the cursed beverage):  "it will do you good."  I took it, and you
might have seen my hand tremble as the bottle went click--click
against the glass.  By the time I had swallowed it, the old lady
had finished her operations at the bureau, and was coming towards
me, the wax-candle bobbing in one hand and a large parcel in the
other.

"Now's the time," thought I.

"Samuel, my dear nephew," said she, "your first name you received
from your sainted uncle, my blessed husband; and of all my nephews
and nieces, you are the one whose conduct in life has most pleased
me."

When you consider that my aunt herself was one of seven married
sisters, that all the Hoggarties were married in Ireland and
mothers of numerous children, I must say that the compliment my
aunt paid me was a very handsome one.

"Dear aunt," says I, in a slow agitated voice, "I have often heard
you say there were seventy-three of us in all, and believe me I do
think your high opinion of me very complimentary indeed:  I'm
unworthy of it--indeed I am."

"As for those odious Irish people," says my aunt, rather sharply,
"don't speak of them, I hate them, and every one of their mothers"
(the fact is, there had been a lawsuit about Hoggarty's property);
"but of all my other kindred, you, Samuel, have been the most
dutiful and affectionate to me.  Your employers in London give the
best accounts of your regularity and good conduct.  Though you have
had eighty pounds a year (a liberal salary), you have not spent a
shilling more than your income, as other young men would; and you
have devoted your month's holidays to your old aunt, who, I assure
you, is grateful."